
The Universal Cycle-Positioning Framework
A cross-asset decision-logic architecture for an AI-native investment system
0. Scope, Lineage, and How to Use This Document
What this is. A reasoning framework — a set of definitions, normalization methods, decision tables, and governance rules that convert raw market/macro data into a position-in-the-cycle classification, and that classification into allocation and selection logic. It is written to be the "reasoning constitution" an AI investment system consults, not a human-readable memo.
What this is not. This document contains no embedded tickers, no live sector calls, no country-specific numbers beyond the illustrative historical references already present in the source material it builds on. Every specific number below is either (a) inherited directly from the two source documents supplied, clearly flagged as such, or (b) an illustrative default band that must be back-tested and calibrated against real data before any capital is put behind it. Wherever this document says "favor" or "reduce," it means a category of exposure defined by where it sits in its own cycle, never a named instrument. The AI system consuming this document is expected to supply the live universe, the live data, and the live scoring — this document supplies the logic that turns that data into a decision.
Lineage. This synthesizes three public bodies of thinking: Howard Marks' writing on cycles and pendulum psychology; the yield-gap/valuation-index style of dynamic allocation associated with S. Naren's contrarian approach at ICICI Prudential AMC, whose recent commentary frames markets as having moved from an easy, broad-based-gains phase into one requiring meticulous, research-intensive stock selection in overlooked, underperforming names; and the macro-thematic dashboard style of DSP Mutual Fund's Netra/Navigator research series, which combines many valuation, risk, and cycle indicators specifically to reduce reliance on any single data point or prevailing narrative, without issuing directional forecasts or return promises. What follows generalizes these public philosophies into one asset-agnostic, machine-operable engine. It is an independent synthesis, not a reproduction of any firm's proprietary model or current portfolio.
Standard institutional caveat. This is a decision-support architecture. It requires live data integration, back-testing of every illustrative threshold, compliance/risk review, and a human governance layer (Section 6) before any output drives real capital. Nothing here is investment, legal, or tax advice.

1. First Principles
Four load-bearing ideas carry through everything below:
Forecasting is not the job; positioning is. Precise macro prediction (exact GDP prints, exact rate paths) is largely unachievable with reliability. What is achievable is a probabilistic read of where a given metric sits relative to its own history and which direction it's moving. The system should never output "GDP will be X%" — it should output "the GDP cycle is in phase Y with confidence Z."
Mean reversion is the default hypothesis, not a certainty. A sector, asset, or metric that has moved far from its own long-run behavior is more likely than not to revert — but "more likely than not" is not "certain," which is exactly why Section 6's Pre-Mortem exists.
"This time is different" is the correct default skepticism, held with humility. Extrapolating a recent trend indefinitely is the most common institutional error. But because the historical window itself can occasionally break (regulation, disruption, a currency-regime change), the system must be able to test for a genuine structural break rather than assume one never happens.
Numbers describe the distribution; narrative tells you where the crowd stands inside it. Two assets can have an identical valuation percentile and mean opposite things — one because nobody has noticed yet, one because everybody has already sold and it's a trap. Only a qualitative read of positioning and narrative separates the two. This is the entire justification for Section 2.5.

2. The Universal Cycle-Position Engine
This section answers the core design question directly: how do you take a framework built around one number (the equity Yield Gap) and make it apply to any asset, stock, index, sector, or country?
The answer is that Marks' cycle theory isn't really about equities — it's about oscillation around an equilibrium, driven by reflexive human behavior that overshoots in both directions. Anything with (a) a measurable equilibrium/fair-value anchor and (b) participants whose behavior can overshoot qualifies. Converting that into an algorithm takes three moves.
2.1 Move One — The Anchor-Metric Abstraction
For any asset/cycle, identify the metric that plays the role the Yield Gap plays for equities: a ratio or level with a meaningful long-run equilibrium.
Asset / Cycle type
Anchor metric that plays the "Yield Gap" role
Broad equity index
Yield Gap / BEER, or CAPE
Single stock or sector
P/E, P/B, EV/EBITDA vs. its own 5–10yr range, and vs. the market's
Currency
REER vs. its own 10yr average
Sovereign bonds / rates
Real policy rate vs. its own historical average; curve slope
Credit
Credit-to-GDP gap; high-yield spread
Gold / commodities
Real (inflation-adjusted) price vs. long-run trend; Gold-Silver Ratio vs. ~80:1
Real estate
Rental yield minus mortgage rate (cap-rate spread)
GDP / growth
Output gap (actual vs. potential GDP)
2.2 Move Two — Classify the Metric's Orientation
Not every anchor metric points the same way. Before scoring anything, tag it:
Value-type (high reading = expensive/late-cycle): P/E, Yield Gap, REER overvaluation, credit-to-GDP gap, retail-inflow surge.
Fear-type (high reading = distressed = early-cycle opportunity, i.e., invert before scoring): VIX, credit spreads, CDS spreads, redemption/outflow intensity.
Goldilocks-type (both extremes are late-cycle stress; the middle is healthy, so score by distance from a target band, not by percentile direction): inflation, GDP growth rate itself, capacity utilization, capex-to-GDP.
Getting this tag wrong is the single most common way a generalized cycle model breaks — treating a VIX spike as "euphoria" instead of "capitulation" inverts the entire output.
2.3 Move Three — Normalize, Then Add Direction
For every correctly-oriented anchor metric:
Level: compute its percentile rank over a lookback spanning at least one full historical cycle (10–20+ years, or full available history). Percentile rank is preferred over a raw z-score as the primary read because it's robust to fat tails; z-score is retained as a secondary cross-check.
Direction: compute trailing 3-, 6-, and 12-month rate of change — rising, falling, or flat.
Momentum-of-momentum: is that rate of change accelerating or decelerating?
Level alone is not the phase. A metric at the 20th percentile and falling means something different from a metric at the 20th percentile and turning up — this is exactly the distinction the user's own examples draw between "Value" (falling into cheap) and "Attractive Growth" (rising out of cheap) even though both sit in similarly low percentile territory.
2.4 The Eight-Phase Cycle Wheel
Crossing Level with Direction produces eight phases. This generalizes the four phases you named (Value, Deep Value, Attractive Growth, Momentum) by adding their four natural counterparts on the upper half of the wave.
#
Phase
Position on the wave
Level (percentile, own history)
Direction
Illustrative quantitative trigger*
Qualitative / narrative marker
Default posture
1
Euphoria / Mania
Peak
>90th
Rising or flat-at-highs
Yield Gap >1.70; stock/sector P/E crossing the ~25x discomfort threshold; a "20–30 years of return in months" parabolic reading
"This time is different"; mainstream (non-financial) media coverage; product/IPO proliferation on the theme; leverage & new-account growth surging
Reduce toward the floor of the strategic range; systematic profit-booking regardless of narrative
2
Distribution
Just past peak
75th–90th, stalling
Flattening / rolling over
Breadth narrows even as the index holds; credit spreads start widening while price is still near highs
Skepticism dismissed as "not getting it"; narrowing leadership
Continue trimming; rotate to quality/defensive tilt; raise hedges
3
Denial / Early Decline
Falling from the top
55th–75th
Falling, still above average
Price falls, valuation still above its own long-run average
"Just a healthy correction" narrative with no fundamental improvement evidence
No fresh buying; do not average down pre-emptively; hold hedges
4
Value
Below average, falling
20th–45th
Falling
Metric crosses below its own long-run average and keeps falling
Narrative turns cautious; outflows rising but not yet capitulatory
Begin staged, tranche-based accumulation
5
Deep Value / Capitulation
Trough, just before the turn
<10th–15th
Falling but decelerating (bottoming pattern)
Yield Gap <1.40; VIX >25; breadth extreme-oversold (e.g., <15% of names above their 200-DMA); several rare statistical extremes hitting simultaneously
"This asset class is dead"; forced/redemption-driven selling; no new product launches in the space; extreme underweight positioning
Maximum systematic accumulation, deployed in tranches
6
Attractive Growth / Early Recovery
Just after the trough
15th–30th
Turning up
Early positive inflection in earnings/flow data while the metric is still cheap
"Dead cat bounce" skepticism; price stops making new lows despite still-negative headlines
Continue/accelerate accumulation as fundamentals confirm
7
Momentum / Confirmation
Rising through average
45th–65th
Rising
Trend confirmed across price, breadth, and earnings revisions; metric crosses back above its own average
Narrative turns constructive, not yet euphoric; participation broadens
Ride the trend at normal-to-full strategic weight
8
Optimism / Belief
Rising, above average
65th–85th
Rising, decelerating
Valuation rich but still "justified" by strong realized fundamentals
Herd participation broadens; skepticism gives way to endorsement
Begin trimming outsized winners; rebalance into laggards
*Thresholds marked with specific numbers are inherited directly from the source material (Yield Gap, VIX, breadth, P/E, parabolic-return examples). Percentile bands are illustrative starting points — calibrate per asset class via back-test, they are not universal constants.
2.5 The Qualitative / Narrative Overlay
Numbers alone can't tell you whether a historical range is still valid. This is where an AI system's language-reasoning capability is a genuine structural advantage over a traditional quant model — it can read news flow, earnings-call transcripts, analyst notes, fund-flow commentary, and retail sentiment, and score them.
Markers of top-of-cycle psychology (Phases 1–2): narratives of structural permanence ("new paradigm," "structural re-rating"); dismissal of valuation concerns as failure to understand a new reality; surging retail participation and leverage; proliferation of new products/instruments around the theme.
Markers of bottom-of-cycle psychology (Phase 5): narratives of permanent impairment ("this is structurally broken," "nobody wants this"); forced or redemption-driven selling; capitulatory analyst downgrades even as operating metrics stabilize; an absence of new capital/product formation in the space.
Markers of transition (Phases 3, 6): a persistent gap between price action and narrative — price stops falling despite continued bad headlines, or stops rising despite continued good ones; early, quiet positioning shifts ahead of broad recognition.
Score this as a Narrative Intensity Score (e.g., –100 to +100) derived from systematic text analysis of the above categories, on the same phase scale as the quantitative read.
2.6 Reconciliation and Confidence
Quantitative phase vs. Qualitative phase
Interpretation
Action
Aligned
High-confidence classification
Proceed at full conviction sizing per Section 5
Quant reads cheap, narrative still dismissive/pessimistic
The classic contrarian sweet spot — the crowd hasn't repriced yet
Highest-conviction opportunity, but mandatory Pre-Mortem (Section 6.2) first, to rule out a genuine value trap
Quant reads expensive, narrative still euphoric
Late-cycle, textbook top-forming pattern
Reduce; do not wait for narrative confirmation, which arrives after price does
Ambiguous / conflicting in an unclear way
Genuine uncertainty
Lower confidence, smaller size, flag for human/deeper research review
2.7 Fractal Application
This exact engine — anchor metric → orientation → percentile + direction → phase → narrative overlay → reconciliation — is applied identically at every scope: broad market, sector, single security, country index, currency, or commodity. Nothing changes structurally; only the anchor metric and lookback window change. This is what makes it usable for "any asset class or stock or index or sector or country specific index," as requested — one engine, many inputs.

3. The Cycle Catalog
The Valuation Cycle (Section 2's worked example) is one of many cycles that need this treatment. Below is the full catalog an AI system should track, each scored through the Section 2 engine independently before being combined in Section 4.
Cycle
Primary anchor metric(s)
Orientation
Normalization lookback
Refresh cadence
Leads/lags relationship
Valuation
Yield Gap/BEER; sector & stock P/E, P/B; EVI-style equal-weighted composite (P/E, P/B, G-Sec Yield×P/E, Mcap/GDP); CAPE for long-horizon reads
Value-type
10–20yr / full history
Daily–Monthly
Usually bottoms before the Earnings cycle
Earnings & Margin
Trailing/forward EPS growth; upgrade:downgrade revision breadth; operating margin vs. 10–15yr average
Value-type (margin) / Fear-type (negative revision breadth)
8–12yr
Quarterly
Lags Valuation at troughs; often leads at margin peaks (margins roll over before price)
GDP / Business
Output gap; PMI (mfg & services); industrial production; capacity utilization; Internal Balance Sheet — household/corporate/government capacity (e.g., Household Debt/Disposable Income, historically ~0.34–0.38)
Value-type (output gap) / Goldilocks-type (growth rate)
15–25yr
Monthly/Quarterly
The slowest "regime" cycle — conditions how much weight faster cycles deserve (see Section 4)
Inflation
CPI/WPI vs. central-bank target band; core-vs-headline gap; breakevens
Goldilocks-type
10–15yr
Monthly
Leads the Rate/Liquidity cycle via the central-bank reaction function
Interest Rate & Liquidity
Real policy rate vs. own history; yield-curve slope; systemic liquidity surplus/deficit; central-bank balance-sheet growth
Value-type (rate level) / Fear-type (inversion)
15–20yr
Daily (curve)/Monthly
Leads Credit and Valuation cycles, typically by 6–18 months
Credit / Debt
Credit-to-GDP gap (HP-filtered vs. trend, λ≈400,000, Basel-style); private credit growth vs. GDP growth; corporate Debt/EBITDA; NPA cycle; high-yield spread
Value-type (gap) / Fear-type (spreads, NPAs)
15–20yr (short cycle); 50–75yr supercycle as background context only
Quarterly
Best early-warning indicator of systemic stress; the long supercycle isn't tactically actionable, only contextual
Currency / External Balance
REER vs. 10yr average; Current Account/GDP; forex reserve import-cover
Value-type (REER) / Fear-type (reserve stress)
10–15yr
Monthly/Quarterly
Currency bottoms often precede capital-flow-cycle turns
FII/DII & Capital Flows
Rolling 3/6/12-month net flows as % of market cap or z-score vs. 5yr distribution; domestic systematic (SIP-style) flow trend
Value-type in trend / Fear-type at capitulation extremes
5–8yr
Weekly/Monthly
A confirming, not originating, indicator — flows chase returns, so use to corroborate a call, not generate one
Sentiment / Behavioral
Volatility-index percentile; breadth (% above 50/200-DMA); put-call ratio; survey sentiment; narrative-tone (NLP) score
Fear-type (vol, spreads)
5–10yr
Daily
Most reliable at extremes (near Phases 1 or 5); a poor mid-cycle timing tool — can stay stretched for long stretches
Sector / Thematic
Sector-vs-market relative price ratio; sector P/E relative to market vs. own history; sector margin cycle; order-book/capacity-utilization for capital-goods-type exposures
Value-type
8–15yr
Monthly/Quarterly
Apply the identical Section 2 engine — fully fractal with market and security level
Commodity
Real price vs. long-run trend; Gold-Silver Ratio vs. ~80:1; futures curve shape
Value-type, with an override rule below
20–30yr (long supercycles)
Daily/Monthly
Prone to the sharpest overshoots of any asset class — see Parabolic Rule
Real Estate
Rental yield minus mortgage rate; price-to-income; unsold-inventory months
Value-type
15–20yr
Quarterly/Annual
Illiquidity means this cycle lags financial-asset cycles by several quarters
Capex / Investment
Gross Fixed Capital Formation/GDP; capacity utilization; capital-goods order books; credit growth to industry
Goldilocks-type
15–20yr
Quarterly
Long and lumpy (historically ~5–7yr cycles); lags GDP recovery, leads the next industrial-earnings cycle
Volatility / Risk-Regime
Realized & implied vol percentile; cross-asset correlation regime
Fear-type
10–15yr
Daily
Governs position-sizing/leverage overlay more than direction — low-vol grind vs. high-vol chop are different regimes at the same directional phase
Global Risk-Appetite / Dollar
DXY vs. own history; US real yields; global risk-on/off breadth
Value-type (DXY strength = tighter EM conditions)
10–15yr
Weekly
An external conditioning variable for the Currency and Flows cycles of any non-reserve-currency market
Policy / Regulatory
Event-driven: budget cycle, election cycle, regulatory-intensity score
Qualitative-primary
N/A — calendar-tracked
Event-triggered
Overlays as a qualitative risk flag on all of the above rather than a smooth continuous score
The Three-Balance-Sheet meta-lens. The source material's "Internal / External / Market" balance-sheet framing isn't a 17th cycle — it's an organizing lens that maps directly onto Section 4's functional groups: Internal balance sheet → GDP/Business + Credit cycles; External balance sheet → Currency + Global Risk-Appetite cycles; Market balance sheet → Valuation + Sentiment + Flows cycles. Keeping this mapping explicit prevents double-counting when cycles are combined below.
The Parabolic Return Compression Rule (generalized from the source's gold example): if any asset delivers more than roughly its own long-run average annual return compressed into a window of a few months (the source's illustration: 20–30 years of typical return inside ~24 months, 200–400% appreciation), treat this as a structural Phase-1 signal and trigger the systematic trim rule regardless of how compelling the contemporaneous narrative is. This is a case where the "number" (compression ratio) is deliberately given more weight than the "story," because parabolic moves are precisely where narrative is most persuasive and most wrong.

4. Multi-Cycle Synthesis — Combining Everything Into One Flow
4.1 Functional Grouping
Group
Cycles included
Question it answers
Macro-Regime
GDP/Business, Inflation, Rate/Liquidity, Credit/Debt
What's the economic weather?
Market-Structure
Valuation, Earnings/Margin, Sentiment/Behavioral, FII/DII Flows
Is the market/asset cheap or dear, and is money moving in or out?
External
Currency, Global Risk-Appetite/Dollar
What's happening to cross-border capital and the currency?
Idiosyncratic
Sector/Thematic, Commodity, Real Estate, Capex — scored at the relevant sub-portfolio level
Within the favored macro backdrop, what specifically looks attractive?
4.2 Regime Classification
Use the Macro-Regime group alone to classify the prevailing backdrop into one of five clusters: Recovery → Expansion → Overheating → Slowdown → Crisis/Capitulation. This regime label is what determines how much weight the other groups deserve — a cheap valuation means something different in a Recovery than it does mid-Crisis.
4.3 Composite Score with Dynamic Weighting
Rather than fixed weights, weight the four functional groups by regime:
Regime
Macro-Regime weight
Market-Structure weight
External weight
Why
Recovery
30%
45%
25%
Valuation/Sentiment typically lead the turn; External confirms via currency bottoming
Expansion
35%
40%
25%
Balanced — no single group dominates
Overheating
45%
35%
20%
Macro imbalances (inflation, credit-to-GDP gap) become the binding constraint ahead of pure valuation
Slowdown
40%
40%
20%
Earnings/Margin deterioration corroborates the Macro-Regime read
Crisis / Capitulation
25%
55%
20%
Behavioral extremes become the single highest-value signal at true systemic troughs
Treat these as priors to refine through back-tested optimization, not fixed constants.
4.4 The Confluence / Alignment Score
Map each cycle's Phase to a simple directional lean (+1: Phases 5–7, buy-favorable; 0: Phases 4, 8, ambiguous; –1: Phases 1–3, sell-favorable). Alignment Score = the proportion of independently-scored cycles pointing the same direction.
High alignment, strong magnitude → high-conviction call, larger tactical tilt.
Low alignment / mixed signals → stay close to strategic neutral weights, smaller tilts, mandatory Pre-Mortem before any shift.
This formalizes the kind of "several statistical extremes hitting at once" confluence logic that shows up in macro-thematic dashboards generally — a single Phase-5 reading is a data point; five uncorrelated cycles simultaneously reading Phase-5 is a regime signal.
4.5 Worked Logical Flow (using only the source material's own historical references, reinterpreted through this lens)
2018 episode, re-read: Rate/Liquidity cycle deteriorating (10Y yield 6.46%→7.77%) while the Valuation-cycle anchor (equity earnings yield) stayed flat → Yield Gap crosses past the 1.70 Phase-1/2 threshold → Composite Score turns negative even before the Sentiment/Flows cycle turns — the engine would flag a defensive cut ahead of broad recognition, consistent with the source's 40%→20% clinical reduction.
2012 episode, re-read: Currency/External cycle stressed (high CAD) simultaneously with the domestic Valuation cycle in Phase 4/5 → a country-level Composite Score comparison (Section 5.2) tilts allocation toward markets/segments scoring better on the same composite — consistent with the source's rotation into IT and US-linked exposure.
Gold episode, re-read: Commodity cycle triggers the Parabolic Rule override (Section 3) independent of what the Valuation-cycle percentile alone would say → systematic trim from 20% to ~13%, benchmarked on standard fixing prices for consistency across the multi-asset sleeve.

5. From Cycle Position to Portfolio Action
5.1 Asset Allocation Engine
Illustrative bands, anchored to the source document's own thresholds — calibrate before use:
Composite reading
Regime label
Equity
Debt
Gold/REITs/InvITs
Cash/Arbitrage
Yield Gap <1.40 / Phase 5, high alignment
Deep Value / Capitulation
70–90%
5–15%
5–10%
0–5%
Value / Phase 4–6
Value / Early Recovery
55–70%
15–25%
8–12%
0–5%
Neutral / Phase 6–7
Momentum / Fair Value
40–55%
25–35%
10–15%
0–10%
Yield Gap >1.70 / Phase 1–2, high alignment
Distribution / Euphoria
10–25%
40–60%*
10–20%
5–15%
*At the high-equity end of the range, tax-efficient implementation (see 5.5) can keep gross equity exposure near ~65% while net exposure runs as low as 10–20% via cash-future arbitrage — a structural choice, not a valuation call.
5.2 Country / Regional Allocation Engine
Apply Section 2's engine independently to each country's own Currency, GDP, Valuation, and Flows cycles; rank countries by Composite Score to guide relative allocation across a cross-border sleeve. This is the identical mechanism used in the 2012 illustration above — it generalizes to any country pair or basket, not just a single historical case.
5.3 Sector Rotation Reference (generic style factors — no named sectors)
This maps style/factor exposures, not specific industries, to Business-Cycle phase. The live universe must be mapped onto these categories using the Sector-Specific Cycle module, not read off this table directly.
Business-cycle phase
Style/factor exposures historically favored
Style/factor exposures historically reduced
Recovery
Rate-sensitive, high-operating-leverage cyclicals; deeply-discounted quality
Defensives priced as if the downturn is permanent
Expansion
Capex/investment-linked, margin-expansion beneficiaries
— (broad participation is typical)
Overheating
Pricing-power and real-asset/inflation-linked exposures
Long-duration growth names sitting in their own Phase-1
Slowdown
Quality, low-leverage, high-FCF-yield compounders
High-operating-leverage cyclicals still priced for expansion
Crisis/Capitulation
Balance-sheet strength (high Cash/Total-Assets); the "neglected" cohort from 5.4
Anything reliant on short-term/rollover-dependent financing
5.4 Security Selection Funnel
Reiterating the scope note: no company names, sector names, or live screens are embedded here — this is the scoring logic the AI system runs against its own live fundamental-data feed.
A four-gate funnel, in order:
Cycle-Favorability Gate (top-down). Only surface new candidates from sectors/themes whose Sector-Specific Cycle phase is 4–7 (Value through Momentum). Existing holdings in Phase 1–2 sectors move to the trim/hedge workflow instead of the buy funnel.
Quality Screen. ROE/ROCE stable (not merely high) over a 5–8yr trailing window — stability signals durability over a cyclically-flattered single year. Cash+Short-Term-Investments/Total-Assets above the peer distribution's median. FCF Yield positive and ideally rising. Debt/EBITDA within a peer-appropriate bound.
Idiosyncratic Value Screen. Re-run the identical Section 2 engine at the single-security level: percentile-rank the stock's own P/E/P/B/EV-EBITDA against its own 5–10yr history — not just against the sector. This deliberately catches two distinct opportunities: a name in its own Phase 4–6 within an already-attractive sector (best case), and it deliberately excludes a name that has run into its own Phase 1–2 even inside an otherwise merely Momentum-phase sector (avoiding "the most extended name in a reasonable sector").
Neglect / Contrarian Confirmation Screen. Declining or below-average institutional-ownership trend; a negative-but-inflecting analyst-revision trend (turning, not just low); absence of a name-specific euphoric retail narrative.
Sizing: rank the shortlist by combined Quality + Idiosyncratic-Value + Neglect confidence; size positions proportional to that combined confidence, capped by standing single-name and sector concentration limits; log the rationale per Section 6.4.
5.5 Multi-Asset Implementation Toolkit (carried forward from the source material, generalized)
Cash-future arbitrage to preserve a tax-efficient equity-fund structure while running a materially lower net equity exposure than the gross figure implies.
Tactical duration initiated when the Currency cycle's REER anchor bottoms relative to its own history, ahead of the capital-inflow response that typically compresses yields afterward.
Standardized benchmarking (e.g., fixing-price conventions for gold) so the Commodity cycle's Parabolic Rule is measured consistently across the multi-asset sleeve rather than on a noisy spot quote.

6. Governance, Risk, and the AI Operating Protocol
6.1 Decision Checklist (procedural gate — run before finalizing any recommendation)
Is the signal corroborated by at least two independent cycle categories (one Macro-Regime + one Market-Structure), not valuation alone?
Has the qualitative Narrative Score been computed and reconciled against the quantitative phase (Section 2.6), with any divergence explicitly noted?
Does the normalization lookback span at least one full historical cycle, and has it been checked for an un-modeled structural break (regulatory reset, series redefinition, market-structure change)?
Is position size scaled to the Confidence/Alignment Score, not to narrative appeal alone?
If the Parabolic Return Compression Rule fired, was the systematic trim executed regardless of the prevailing narrative?
Is the call corroborated across at least two independent reporting periods, not one data point vulnerable to a one-off distortion?
Are the Currency/External and domestic cycles consistent, or does a conflict (e.g., cheap equity + currency stress) require an explicit hedge decision first?
Has the implementation/tax layer been checked so realized net exposure matches the model's intended exposure?
Does the shift exceed a human-in-the-loop threshold (6.3)? If so, is sign-off logged?
Is a dated, versioned rationale record being written for the post-mortem learning loop?
6.2 Pre-Mortem Protocol
For any allocation shift above a defined threshold, or any new high-conviction security position: generate a written Pre-Mortem before execution. Assume 12–24 months have passed and the position has underperformed — articulate the single most plausible reason mean reversion failed (permanent structural impairment, competitive disruption, regulatory shock, an unmodeled break in the anchor metric's own history). If a plausible, evidence-backed failure story emerges, the system must do one of: reduce size, attach a specific monitoring trigger tied to that failure story ("if metric X breaches Y, exit"), or escalate to human review. This operationalizes the source material's "assume mean reversion has failed" stress test for every cycle in this catalog, not equities alone.
6.3 Position Sizing and Human-in-the-Loop Triggers
Illustrative sizing rule: Size multiplier = Confidence × Alignment (both scaled 0–1), capped by standing concentration limits. Escalate to a human reviewer when: any single rebalancing shift exceeds a defined percentage-point threshold; any anchor metric reads beyond roughly ±3 standard deviations (possible data error or genuine regime break — both warrant a human look); Alignment Score is low but the recommended action size is not; a new sector/country exposure is being initiated for the first time; or a Pre-Mortem surfaces an unresolved plausible failure story.
6.4 Explainability and Audit Logging
Every output must log: which specific cycles and KPIs drove it, their raw values, percentile/z-score, the qualitative markers detected, and the final reconciliation. Versioned and timestamped. This is both a governance requirement and the raw material for periodically checking which cycles/KPIs were actually predictive, so the Section 4.3 weights can be refined over time rather than held as permanent assumptions.
6.5 Suggested Output Schema
CycleAssessment {
  cycle_name: string
  scope: "market" | "sector" | "security" | "country" | "currency" | "commodity"
  as_of_date: date
  anchor_metrics: [string]
  orientation: "value" | "fear" | "goldilocks"
  lookback_window_years: number
  level_percentile: 0-100
  z_score: float
  direction_3m / direction_12m: "rising" | "falling" | "flat"
  momentum_state: "accelerating" | "decelerating" | "stable"
  quantitative_phase: enum[Euphoria, Distribution, Denial, Value, DeepValue, AttractiveGrowth, Momentum, Optimism]
  narrative_intensity_score: -100 to +100
  qualitative_markers_detected: [string]
  reconciled_phase: enum (same as above)
  confidence: 0-100
  contributing_kpis: [{name, value, weight}]
}
CompositeAllocationDecision {
  as_of_date: date
  scope: string
  regime_cluster: "Recovery"|"Expansion"|"Overheating"|"Slowdown"|"Crisis"
  cycle_assessments: [CycleAssessment]
  composite_score: -100 to +100
  alignment_score: 0-100
  recommended_action: { asset_class: allocation_% }
  position_size_multiplier: 0-1
  requires_human_review: boolean
  checklist_status: { item: pass|fail|na }
  pre_mortem_summary: string
  rationale_log: string
}
6.6 Cadence Summary
Daily: volatility, breadth, curve slope, price-based valuation ratios, flow data. Weekly: cumulative flows, dollar-index trend. Monthly: inflation prints, PMI, REER, credit growth, retail-inflow trend. Quarterly: GDP, capacity utilization, corporate results/margins, NPA data, real-estate metrics. Structural (annual or event-triggered only): debt supercycle and demographic backdrop — these condition everything else but are not tactically actionable on their own.

7. Closing Scope Reminder
No ticker, sector, or country in this document represents a live recommendation — every specific figure is either inherited from the source material as a historical illustration or an explicitly-flagged illustrative default requiring back-test calibration. This is a decision-support reasoning layer for a system that still needs live data feeds, back-testing, compliance review, and a human governance layer per Section 6 before it touches real capital. Referenced past performance (2001, 2007, 2012, 2018 episodes) illustrates how the mechanism would have read those events, not a guarantee of how it will read the next one.

Ratios and KPIs: (Starting point but not covering all of it, can create or add new with time)
1. Macro & Systemic KPIs (Market-Wide & Economic Indicators)
These metrics are used to measure the overall health of the economy, systemic risks, and the relative attractiveness of the broader market.
Yield Gap Ratio / BEER (Bond Equity Earnings Ratio) 
Calculation: 10-Year Government Bond Yield (G-Sec) divided by the Equity Earnings Yield (or mathematically: 10-Year G-Sec Yield x Nifty P/E Ratio). A Modified Yield Gap uses the 1-Year G-Sec yield instead.
Timeframe of Evaluation: Monitored dynamically (daily/monthly) to dictate ongoing tactical asset allocation.
Use Case: Evaluates the relative attractiveness of equities versus fixed income. If the yield gap is < 1.40, equities are deeply undervalued (triggering maximum equity allocation of 70%-90%); if it is > 1.70, equities are severely overvalued (triggering a defensive shift to debt).
Equity Valuation Index (EVI) 
Calculation: A composite score assigning equal weights to Price-to-Earnings (P/E), Price-to-Book (P/B), G-Sec Yield * P/E, and Market Cap-to-GDP ratio.
Timeframe of Evaluation: Daily/Monthly continuous monitoring.
Use Case: Filters out temporary accounting distortions to provide a definitive reading of whether the market is "Attractive," "Neutral," or "Alert/Expensive". Used by funds like ICICI Prudential Balanced Advantage Fund to automatically rebalance portfolios and remove human emotion.
Credit-to-GDP Gap 
Calculation: The difference between the current credit-to-GDP ratio and its long-term trend (extracted using a Hodrick-Prescott filter with a smoothing parameter of 400,000).
Timeframe of Evaluation: Quarterly.
Use Case: The most accurate early warning indicator of systemic banking crises. A gap exceeding 10 percentage points signals a fundamentally over-leveraged system and a highly probable severe bust.
Yield Curve Shape 
Calculation: The spread between short-term (e.g., 2-year) and long-term (e.g., 10-year) sovereign bond interest rates.
Timeframe of Evaluation: Daily/Continuous.
Use Case: An inverted yield curve (short-term rates higher than long-term) acts as a classic leading indicator of a recession.
Real Effective Exchange Rate (REER) 
Calculation: The weighted average of a country's currency in relation to an index or basket of other major currencies, adjusted for inflation.
Timeframe of Evaluation: Monthly/Quarterly.
Use Case: Used to measure if a domestic currency is overbought or oversold (e.g., Rupee REER bottoming below 88) to gauge macroeconomic stability and foreign investment attractiveness.
2. Micro & Company-Specific KPIs (Fundamentals)
These ratios are used for bottom-up stock selection, sector analysis, and determining corporate health.
Price-to-Book Value (P/BV) 
Calculation: Share Price / Book Value per Share.
Timeframe of Evaluation: Daily pricing evaluated against quarterly/annual balance sheet reporting.
Use Case: Highly reliable gauge of intrinsic value that is less volatile than earnings ratios. Used heavily to automatically buy low and sell high across market cycles.
Price-to-Earnings (P/E) Ratio & Shiller P/E (CAPE) 
Calculation: Share Price / Earnings Per Share (EPS). The Shiller P/E smooths corporate earnings over 10 years, adjusting for inflation.
Timeframe of Evaluation: Daily (trailing PE) and Long-term 10-year horizons.
Use Case: Used to identify overvalued or undervalued stocks and sectors. CAPE prevents investors from being tricked by temporarily bloated profit margins at the absolute peak of an economic expansion.
Return on Equity (ROE) & Return on Capital Employed (ROCE) 
Calculation: ROE = Net Income / Shareholder's Equity. ROCE measures operating capital efficiency.
Timeframe of Evaluation: Quarterly and Annually.
Use Case: Core indicators of business quality. Funds like DSP Quant use ROE to filter out structurally broken businesses and select companies with stable earnings growth.
Free Cash Flow (FCF) Yield & Dividend Yield 
Calculation: Free Cash Flow per Share / Share Price. Dividend Yield = Annual Dividends per Share / Share Price.
Timeframe of Evaluation: Annually/Quarterly.
Use Case: Key metrics for "Value" scoring. Used to identify companies that generate actual cash surplus and reward shareholders, providing downside protection.
Cash + Short Term Investments as % of Total Assets 
Calculation: (Cash + Short Term Investments) / Total Assets.
Timeframe of Evaluation: Quarterly/Annually.
Use Case: Assesses corporate balance sheet strength and liquidity buffers. (e.g., IT sectors holding ~9% of their market cap in cash).
3. Behavioral, Sentiment & Technical KPIs
These metrics quantify human psychology, market momentum, and the transition between fear and euphoria (Howard Marks' pendulum).
Retail Inflows & Reverse Asset Allocation 
Calculation: Tracking the volume of retail money pouring into mutual funds, ETFs, and IPO oversubscriptions.
Timeframe of Evaluation: Monthly.
Use Case: Used as a contrarian indicator. Peak retail inflows specifically into aggressive small/mid-caps after they have already delivered massive returns indicates "peak FOMO" (Fear Of Missing Out) and an impending market top.
High-Yield Corporate Credit Spreads 
Calculation: Yield of high-yield corporate bonds minus the yield of risk-free government bonds.
Timeframe of Evaluation: Continuous/Daily.
Use Case: Fixed-income markets are forward-looking. If equity markets are at all-time highs but credit spreads are actively widening, it signals that "smart money" is pricing in impending defaults and economic deterioration.
Market Breadth (Moving Averages) 
Calculation: Percentage of stocks in an index trading above their 50-Day Moving Average (50-DMA) or 200-Day Moving Average (200-DMA).
Timeframe of Evaluation: Daily/Weekly.
Use Case: Provides a trend-following and sentiment overlay. For example, if only 11% of stocks are above their 50-DMA and 15% above their 200-DMA, the market is at an extreme oversold reading, bordering on a massive contrarian buy signal.
India VIX (Volatility Index) 
Calculation: Market expectations of near-term volatility based on option prices.
Timeframe of Evaluation: Continuous/Daily.
Use Case: The "Fear Gauge." A spike in VIX (e.g., crossing 25) indicates severe panic, often signaling a market trough where maximum aggressiveness in capital allocation is warranted.
4. Asset Class Specific KPIs
Metrics tailored to evaluate alternative or specific asset classes.
Real Estate Valuation Gap 
Calculation: Home loan interest rates minus rental yields.
Timeframe of Evaluation: Periodic/Macro.
Use Case: Identifies real estate bubbles vs. value. If mortgage rates are 7% and rental yields rise to 4%-5%, it marks deep value. If mortgage rates are 7.5% and rental yields drop to 2%-3%, it signals a massive real estate bubble.
Gold to Silver Ratio (GSR) 
Calculation: Price of Gold / Price of Silver.
Timeframe of Evaluation: Continuous.
Use Case: The long-term average is ~80:1. When speculative frenzy drives the ratio below 50:1, silver is considered highly overvalued relative to gold and susceptible to a crash.
5. Mutual Fund & Portfolio Performance KPIs
Used to evaluate the skill of fund managers and the historical behavior of portfolios.
Risk-Adjusted Returns 
Calculation: Average Rolling Returns (%) / Standard Deviation.
Timeframe of Evaluation: Typically over 3-year or 5-year rolling periods.
Use Case: Demonstrates how efficiently a fund delivers returns relative to the risk taken. Highly useful for screening hybrid and Balanced Advantage Funds (BAFs) against index benchmarks.
Upside and Downside Capture Ratios 
Calculation: Fund's performance during rising/falling markets divided by the Benchmark's performance during the same period.
Timeframe of Evaluation: Evaluated across specific quarters of market rallies or corrections (e.g., quarters where the index rose or fell by >5%).
Use Case: Downside protection is the central philosophy of Balanced Advantage Funds. A lower downside capture indicates superior capital protection during market crashes.

